SHIVA TANDAV STOTRAM — Caption/Lyrics File
===============================================

INSTRUCTIONS: Paste the full lyrics/captions below this line.
Each line will become one element in the lyrics[] array.
Empty lines will create visual spacing in the teleprompter.

--- PASTE LYRICS BELOW ---

जटा टवी गलज्जलप्रवाह पावितस्थले गलेऽव लम्ब्यलम्बितां भुजंगतुंग मालिकाम्‌।
डमड्डमड्डमड्डमन्निनाद वड्डमर्वयं चकारचण्डताण्डवं तनोतु नः शिव: शिवम्‌ ॥१॥

जटाकटा हसंभ्रम भ्रमन्निलिंपनिर्झरी विलोलवीचिवल्लरी विराजमानमूर्धनि।
धगद्धगद्धगज्ज्वल ल्ललाटपट्टपावके किशोरचंद्रशेखरे रतिः प्रतिक्षणं मम: ॥२॥

धराधरेंद्रनंदिनी विलासबन्धुबन्धुर स्फुरद्दिगंतसंतति प्रमोद मानमानसे।
कृपाकटाक्षधोरणी निरुद्धदुर्धरापदि क्वचिद्विगम्बरे मनोविनोदमेतु वस्तुनि ॥३॥

जटाभुजंगपिंगल स्फुरत्फणामणिप्रभा कदंबकुंकुमद्रव प्रलिप्तदिग्व धूमुखे।
मदांधसिंधु रस्फुरत्वगुत्तरीयमेदुरे मनोविनोदद्भुतं बिंभर्तुभूत भर्तरि ॥४॥

सहस्रलोचन प्रभृत्यशेषलेखशेखर प्रसूनधूलिधोरणी विधूसरां घ्रिपीठभूः।
भुजंगराजमालया निबद्धजाटजूटकः श्रियैचिरायजायतां चकोरबंधुशेखरः ॥५॥

ललाटचत्वरज्वल द्धनंजयस्फुलिंगभा निपीतपंच सायकंनम न्निलिंपनायकम्‌।
सुधामयूखलेखया विराजमानशेखरं महाकपालिसंपदे शिरोजटालमस्तुनः ॥६॥

करालभालपट्टिका धगद्धगद्धगज्ज्वल द्धनंजया धरीकृतप्रचंड पंचसायके।
धराधरेंद्रनंदिनी कुचाग्रचित्रपत्र कप्रकल्पनैकशिल्पिनी त्रिलोचनेरतिर्मम ॥७॥

नवीनमेघमंडली निरुद्धदुर्धरस्फुर त्कुहुनिशीथनीतमः प्रबद्धबद्धकन्धरः।
निलिम्पनिर्झरीधरस्तनोतु कृत्तिसिंधुरः कलानिधानबंधुरः श्रियं जगंद्धुरंधरः ॥८॥

प्रफुल्लनीलपंकज प्रपंचकालिमप्रभा विडंबि कंठकंध रारुचि प्रबंधकंधरम्‌।
स्मरच्छिदं पुरच्छिंद भवच्छिदं मखच्छिदं गजच्छिदांधकच्छिदं तमंतकच्छिदं भजे ॥९॥

अखर्वसर्वमंगला कलाकदम्बमंजरी रसप्रवाह माधुरी विजृंभणा मधुव्रतम्‌।
स्मरांतकं पुरातकं भावंतकं मखांतकं गजांतकांधकांतकं तमंतकांतकं भजे ॥१०॥

जयत्वदभ्रविभ्रम भ्रमद्भुजंगमस्फुरद्ध गद्धगद्विनिर्गमत्कराल भाल हव्यवाट्।
धिमिद्धिमिद्धि मिध्वनन्मृदंग तुंगमंगलध्वनिक्रमप्रवर्तित: प्रचण्ड ताण्डवः शिवः ॥११॥

दृषद्विचित्रतल्पयो र्भुजंगमौक्तिकमस्र जोर्गरिष्ठरत्नलोष्ठयोः सुहृद्विपक्षपक्षयोः।
तृणारविंदचक्षुषोः प्रजामहीमहेन्द्रयोः समं प्रवर्तयन्मनः कदा सदाशिवं भजे ॥१२॥

कदा निलिंपनिर्झरी निकुंजकोटरे वसन्‌ विमुक्तदुर्मतिः सदा शिरःस्थमंजलिं वहन्‌।
विमुक्तलोललोचनो ललामभाललग्नकः शिवेति मंत्रमुच्चरन्‌ कदा सुखी भवाम्यहम्‌ ॥१३॥

इमं हि नित्यमेव मुक्तमुक्तमोत्तम स्तवं पठन्स्मरन्‌ ब्रुवन्नरो विशुद्धमेति संततम्‌।
हरे गुरौ सुभक्तिमाशु याति नान्यथागतिं विमोहनं हि देहिनां सुशंकरस्य चिंतनम् ॥१४॥



With his neck consecrated by the flow of water falling from his matted hair, and the garland of serpents hanging from his neck, Shiva dances with his Damaru (drum) making the sound 'Damat Damat Damat'.

His forehead, brilliant with the flames blazing from his third eye, and on his head the crescent moon shining, Shiva constantly delights my mind.

The beloved daughter of the mountain king (Parvati), whose mind is full of joy from the continuous creation, her affectionate glances stop all obstacles, may she engage my mind in the dancing Shiva.

The sparks of the blazing fire, the serpents, and the moon on Shiva's forehead are brilliant. May the one who carries the weight of the whole world on his head delight my mind.

May the Lord with the blue neck, who destroys Yama (the god of death) with his fierce waves, the one with matted hair tied by the great serpents, bring prosperity to us.

The Lord who burned Kama with his fierce fire from his forehead, whose head is adorned with the crescent moon, and who carries the great skull (bowl), may he bring us auspiciousness.

May my mind seek happiness in the three-eyed God, who burned the god of love, who is adorned by the sandalwood and kumkum applied on Parvati's chest, and who is the only artist creating the world.

The one whose neck is dark as the midnight sky, from which the moonlight springs, and who is the great leader of the gods, may he bestow prosperity upon us.

I adore the one who destroyed the god of love, the one who destroyed the cities of the demons, the one who cut the head of Ganesha, the one who destroyed Andhaka, and the one who destroyed the god of death.

I adore the one who is the source of all arts, whose collection of virtues is like a flowering garden, the one who destroyed the god of love, the one who destroyed the cities of the demons, the one who destroyed the sacrifices, and the one who destroyed the god of death.

May the Lord Shiva, who dances to the rhythmic beats of the drum, accompanied by the sounds of anklets and other musical instruments, always bring us auspiciousness.

May the Lord who is adorned with a garland of serpents, who holds a skull in his hand, and who destroys all obstacles, protect us.

I seek happiness in the three-eyed Lord, who is the only creator of the world, and who brings joy to his devotees.

The one who recites this supreme hymn daily with devotion, attains purity, gains devotion to the Lord, and achieves liberation. Contemplation of the auspicious Shiva removes delusion.

The one who recites this hymn at the time of worship, especially during the evening, attains prosperity and happiness. The Lord grants them eternal wealth and auspiciousness.